DOC-14380-cluster-compat-upgrade-restructure (#972)
couchbaselabs/docs-sync-gateway: modules/ROOT/pages/cluster-compatibility-version.adoc

= Cluster Compatibility Version
ifdef::show_edition[:page-edition: {release}]
ifdef::prerelease[:page-status: {prerelease}]
:page-role:
:page-content: procedural
:description: Use the cluster compatibility version to perform a rolling upgrade of Sync Gateway 4.1 without downtime and with a safe rollback path.

include::ROOT:partial$_set_page_context.adoc[]

:param-abstract:
:topic-group: Application Deployment
:param-related: {release-notes--xref} | {compatibility--xref}
include::ROOT:partial$_show_page_header_block.adoc[]

== Overview

The cluster compatibility version is a cluster-wide value that {sgw} uses to coordinate behaviour across nodes running different versions during a rolling upgrade.

Introduced in Sync Gateway 4.1, the cluster compatibility version lets you:

* Perform a rolling upgrade without downtime or reduction in cluster capacity.
* Preserve a safe rollback path during the upgrade window.
* Ensure that new cluster-wide features activate only after all nodes reach the new version.

NOTE: Downgrading after the full cluster has been upgraded is not supported.

> The cluster compatibility version mechanism provides a rollback path only while at least one node is still on the previous version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The cluster compatibility version mechanism provides an upgrade rollback path while at least one node is still on the previous version, or the compatibility version is still frozen at a previous version.
```

== How the Cluster Compatibility Version Works

Without a freeze, the cluster compatibility version is always the minimum version across all live nodes in the cluster.
As you upgrade nodes one by one, the minimum advances when older nodes are replaced.

> {sgw} uses the compatibility version to gate cluster-wide feature activation.

Reviewer 2: Should we be making notes going forward as to which features are cluster compatible depending on SGW version? Or saying that no features are specifically marked as cluster compatible in 4.1 at the moment @bbrks

Reviewer: Yeah that's a good point - In 4.1 the only cluster compat version gated feature is metadata migration.

We'll probably have to do that going forwards so customers know which features they can't test behind a frozen upgrade.
There are definitely going to be cases where we have CCV-gated changes that aren't customer-facing features (e.g. internal metadata format changes, etc.) so maybe alongside the feature documentation itself makes sense as a place for this info?

Features that could cause incompatibilities with older nodes remain inactive until the compatibility version reaches the version that introduced them.

> Node-local features, such as revision caching and import processing, activate immediately on each upgraded node regardless of the compatibility version.

Reviewer: I am getting hung up on 'import processing' here mostly because import generally is **_not_** a node-local feature, but isn't gated because it has existed for such a long time

I also feel like we need to define `node-local` somewhere - since it is something that came out of Couchbase Server's implementation/architecture design. I would perhaps suggest something more descriptive, like:

```suggestion
New features that do not depend on metadata shared by other Sync Gateway nodes activate immediately on each upgraded node regardless of the compatibility version. These are considered 'node-local' features, and include areas such as caching, read-only operations, general bug fixes and performance improvements.
```

=== Prerequisites

* All nodes are running {sgw} 4.0 or later.
* You have Admin REST API access to the cluster.
* See xref:ROOT:rolling-upgrade.adoc[Rolling Upgrade] for version requirements and the node upgrade procedure.

=== Procedure

.Step 1: Check the current cluster compatibility version

Call xref:ROOT:rest_api_admin_static.adoc#tag/Server/operation/get__cluster_compat_version[GET /_cluster_compat_version] to confirm the current state before starting.

[source,bash]
----
GET /_cluster_compat_version
----

Example response on a homogeneous 4.0 cluster:

[source,json]
----
{
  "cluster_compat_version": "4.0",
  "nodes": {
    "node1-uid": "4.0",
    "node2-uid": "4.0",
    "node3-uid": "4.0"
  }
}
----

.Step 2: Freeze the cluster compatibility version

Call xref:ROOT:rest_api_admin_static.adoc#tag/Server/operation/post__cluster_compat_version_freeze[POST /_cluster_compat_version/freeze] to pin the version before upgrading any node.

[source,bash]
----
POST /_cluster_compat_version/freeze
----

Example response:

[source,json]
----
{
  "cluster_compat_version": "4.0",
  "nodes": {
    "node1-uid": "4.0",
    "node2-uid": "4.0",
    "node3-uid": "4.0"
  },

>   "frozen_cluster_compat_version": "4.0"

Reviewer: We should do these examples with 4.1 and 4.2 - it's not possible to view or freeze cluster compat version through 4.0 nodes since the feature only lands in 4.1

Reviewer 2: That's an important caveat, actually. Should be done as a Warning/Info banner or equivalent for users @iamfortune

}
----

The presence of `frozen_cluster_compat_version` in the response confirms the freeze is active.

.Step 3: Upgrade each node

For each node in the cluster, follow the steps in xref:ROOT:rolling-upgrade.adoc[Rolling Upgrade].

While the freeze is in effect, `cluster_compat_version` remains pinned at the frozen value even as nodes come online at the new version.
Call xref:ROOT:rest_api_admin_static.adoc#tag/Server/operation/get__cluster_compat_version[GET /_cluster_compat_version] at any time to confirm the freeze is still active and to check the individual version of each node.

.Step 4: Verify all nodes are on the new version

Call xref:ROOT:rest_api_admin_static.adoc#tag/Server/operation/get__cluster_compat_version[GET /_cluster_compat_version] and confirm all nodes in the `nodes` map show the new version.

[source,json]
----
{

>   "cluster_compat_version": "4.0",

Reviewer: ditto - 4.1 and 4.2
